Have you heard of James Bond? The 007! The
British Agent. Secret Agent. One of his amazing
adventures.. one of the books.. is called
“You Only Live Twice!” In this book, there
are quite a few references to the Japanese
culture, the Japanese way of life, some Japanese
words too. In fact, in that book, he is referred
to as “Bondo-san”! Respectable Sir Bond!
James Bond will do a small favour to somebody..
And his friend will take him away privately
and mourn.. “Ouch, you have made a big mistake..!”
“Hey, I helped him after all”, Bond would
say, to which his friend would respond with,
“In Japanese, there is this concept called
ON. And this ON is like an invisible currency..
you do a favour to somebody, you get an ON
on that person. That person has to give you
the opportunity to give a favour back.. Only
then, the ON will balance.. To be “obligated”..
To be “indebted”.. It seems it is such
a dishonour among the Japanese. Look at this,
meanwhile. This is the Twenty-Second Rule
for Life. In this rule, “Ask someone to
do you a small favour, so that they can ask
you to do one in the future.” It looks a
bit confusing, puzzling, riddling, doesn’t
it? We are going to look at a dozen such..
Come running!
Namaste! Four hundred and fiftysix is about
twelve rules for living.
This man is Jordan Peterson. And, a Canadian
researcher, author, professor, speaker, commentator..
media person. He is nearly infamous for his
controversial thoughts and opinions! This
man has written a book called the 12 Rules
For Life. It originally started as 42 rules.
And then, became 25, then 16, finally became
12. We are going to have a jaunty ride through
these 12 rules. And, if you want to just get
a summary of what those 12 rules are, perhaps
you are better off heading somewhere else.
Because, I am going to probably give you my
commentary on them. Things that occur to me
when I look at his Rules. Let us get started.
Rule Number One is “Stand up straight with
your shoulders back!” Stand erect. Shoulders
back. There is something about this body language..
They even call it neurolinguistic programming..
Your mood sets the posture. But wait, your
posture sets your mood. And, guess how important
this is, according to the scientific research
carried in this domain? Amy Cuddy, in her
TED talk about body posture, says, “Usain
Bolt didn’t perform that open-chested hands-towards-heaven
pose because he won the gold medal! Probably,
Usain Bolt won the gold medal BECAUSE he was
used to performing that pose.. Remember that
arrow-pose? Body language matters.
Rule Number Two says, “Treat yourself like
someone you are responsible for helping!”
Take care of yourself too. In that book, he
talks about how beautifully, how well, people
take care of their pets. Dog shampoo. Dog
chocolate. Dog ice-cream. Dog combs. Dog hair
ribbons. Dog pills. Toys to feed the pills
to the pets. But they don’t take care of
themselves as well. First, take care of yourself.
Only afterwards, come the others. Only if
you are healthy and hearty, can you tend to
the others. You can see it very clearly from
this lesson. This is an image you would have
seen if you had taken a flight, you would
have seen, this is how you wear a mask. and,
the hostess, the person who is guiding you
along about the safety precautions will say,
“If you are traveling with a child, please
remember, wear your mask first, before trying
to get one on to a child.” To put it simply,
you are not useful to anybody if you are dead.
So, first take care of yourself. A very good
lesson. Consider yourself to be somebody worthy
of being saved, being helped, being take care
of, being tended to! Many people don’t do
that. They burn themselves in their intent
interest to be helpful to others. You can
be more helpful if you only took care of yourself
a little more.
Rule Number Three is about making friends..
Who do we pick as our friends? They want the
best for you.. The ministers who will call
a spade a spade.. remember? Only those who
can point out my flaws, I want to allow near
me! Ralph Waldo Emerson, thinker, philosopher,
writer. He said, “I don’t need a friend
who changes when I change, nods when I nod.
My shadow does that much better!” Are you
going to be different? Will you provide counter-viewpoints?
Are you going to be my Devil’s Advocate?
Are you going to raise a finger? Stop me?
Come to me, only then! So, that’s a very
good lesson.
Rule Number Four — Compare yourself to who
you were yesterday. Not to who someone else
is today! That is beyond ridiculous.. Because,
their backgrounds, their desires, their interests,
their motivations, their specific challenges,
each is very different from each other. Far
more different than even the proverbial Apples
and Oranges. Comparing that, wasting time,
spending effort, don’t end up becoming a
good-for-nothing-nobody!
Do you remember this man? You may not. His
name is Joseph Heller. He wrote only that
book. He has of course written a few more,
but Joseph Heller is synonymous with Catch-22.
At a party given by a billionaire on a private
island, a friend tells Joseph Heller, that
their host had made more money in a single
day than Heller had earned from his wildly
popular novel Catch-22 over its whole history.
Heller responds,“Yes, but I have something
he will never have — ENOUGH.” Enough.
I am not interested in comparisons. I don’t
have desires that are beyond my reach. I have
enough. And, HE doesn’t have THAT. So, stop
comparing.
Rule Number Five — Do not let your children
do anything that makes you dislike them. We
can turn this one around too.. That would
be my preference. But, first, what is the
context from which this author is posting
this thought? Well, if you don’t like it
as a parent, the society won’t like it either,
as a bystander! A notorious child! Correct!
But, I would like to flip it around and say,
“Do not do anything that makes your children
dislike you!” Guess why? Even if you speak
a thousand good words and kind phrases, your
behaviour.. the way you carry yourself, your
behaviour, your personality, it will speak
volumes..! The same Ralph Waldo Emerson returns
with, “What you do speaks so loudly, that
I cannot hear what you say!” How beautiful!
Rule Number Six — Setting your house in
perfect order before you criticise the world!
Are you worthy of being a critic?? This does
seem off key, because, if this were to be
the rule, well, nobody can criticise A R Rahman’s
music. Nobody can criticise a Surya Kumar
Yadav’s cricket batting.. Is that so? On
the other hand, this is perhaps what the author
is trying to say. If you put in the effort
to clean things up inside you, probably your
outlook, your perspective, the vantage point
from which you observed and found that silly
thing, that problem, that imperfection, probably
that will vanish.. your viewpoint has changed..
because your expertise level has gone up.
And, so, Set your house in perfect order.
Another reason? Seeing your house in perfect
order, one more may be inspired to do so.
And, if each person does it to their frontyard,
.. drops the rubbish neatly in a personal
trashcan, the road will automatically become
clean, won’t it!? No need for a government
to clean it with some public works department!
Rule Number Seven — is about pursuing what
is meaningful, and not what is expedient..
not what is currently trending.. Particularly
the media rage about today’s trending hashtags..!
That is what John F Kennedy did.. He said,
nine years before he actually put man on the
Moon, he said, “We are not trying to put
man on the Moon because it is easy! We are
trying to do that specifically because we
know it is difficult. We know it is hard.
And, that is why we are doing it! We are doing
it in spite of it”.
Rule Number Eight — is about telling the
truth.. At least, not lying.. How does this
make sense? Tell the truth, or at least don’t
lie!! Okay, there is a huge gap between what
is the truth, and what is a lie. Remember
the court scene? I will tell you the truth,
nothing but the truth, and the whole truth..
You can’t hold anything back — you need
to tell it all. You can’t tell all the truth
and add a few sundry lies alongwith. That
won’t cut it either..! See, lies are dime
a dozen. And, each one of us can have one
version of it. But, there is only one version
of the truth. Sometimes, you don’t even
need to tell the truth, because there is only
one version, the other person can deduce it
by themselves! And hence, tell the truth..
and, don’t wriggle yourself into a situation
where you need to lie your way out.
Shakespeare made it very clear.. The liar..,
they are not cheating you. They are cheating
themselves! If you don’t know any better,
you are not lying. You are lying only when,
you know the truth, and you are choosing not
to tell it. That is why, Shakespeare says
thus, in Hamlet, “This above all — to
theine own self be true, and it must follow,
as night follows day, thou can not them be
false to any man.” To thine own self, be
true.. To your innermost self.. In the deepest
corner of your heart.. If you have something
hidden there that you are cognisant of, don’t
keep that from me, and spin a different story
to me. I am not going to hold you responsible
if you didn’t know what the truth was. Knowing
it, keeping it from me is the problem.
Rule Number Nine — Assume that the person
you are listening to might know something
you don’t! It is a pretty famous quote,
a quote that laid the foundation for the Open
Source movement, they claim! “None of us
is as smart as all of us!” If we all get
together, nobody, .. remember those “Rest
of the World” teams? The World Champion
cricket team versus the Rest of the World
cricket team.. Typically, the rest of the
world wins, and why? The Rest of the World
is the best of the best, hand picked, all
brought together. So, respect.. Each of them
may have something that you can learn from.
Approach every person with a learner’s mindset.
That is Rule Number Nine.
Rule Number Ten — is about Being Precise
in your Speech. And, he gives the example
of paint brushes. There is a paint brush like
this one. It is so precise and narrow that
it can help you paint a single eye-lash on
Mona Lisa’s eye. There is a brush like this
one too. A broadstroked roller that is used
to paint walls. So, when getting into an argument
for example, probably with your wife, probably
with your friend, you are getting into an
argument.. stooping low with comments like,
“You are always like this”, or “I remember
what you did last summer”, and so on.. those
are broadstrokes. Come to the point. Refer
to that only. And, be concise in your speech.
That is a very good rule for life.
Rule Number Eleven is about not bothering
children when they are skateboarding. He will
start with a wonderfully gripping story! Very
interesting! And, you would wonder, where
is the author going to take us? The rule itself
is pretty funny to hear! But, he gives us
a very good lesson because, if you look at
skateboarding injuries.. you will notice that
it is pretty messy. And, if a child is risking
that injury.. wearing helmet, protective gear,
.. if it is risking injury, in a safe environment,
probably being observed by some coaches, or
by other fellow players.., the child is getting
ready for the game of life. He is going to
get bruised and beaten up in the real world.
Helicopter parenting won’t help. Micromanagement
won’t do. So, if a child is learning to
skateboard, it means the child is going out
of their circle of comfort. Cautiously exploring,
judging an injury, learning to take care,
and understanding how to bounce back. So important.
You can’t teach them through any college
course, how to face those challenges of life.
And, finally, Rule Number Twelve, Pet a cat
when you encounter one on the street. You
decide whether it is a cat or dog that suits
you, but in our city, it is a cat, says the
author, and continues by bringing around the
beautiful meditative lesson, “Stop to smell
the roses”. Most of our time is spent worrying,
and being concerned, and planning for what
the future is going to be.. Or, regretting,
or being nostalgic, being wistful of what
has gone by.. Very few, very rarely, enjoy
the moment for what it is. If you encounter
a double rainbow in front of you in the horizon,
you grope around for your smartphone first.
And, before he changes the settings and gets
ready for the all-important photograph, that
rainbow is gone. Learn to enjoy that moment
— is the Twelfth Rule. Pet a cat when you
encounter one on the street. So, twelve beautiful
rules for life, and I am hoping we will jump
back into these.. Later this month, we have
a flurry of Quotidians coming up, and probably
we will dive into these in more detail.
As a closing thought, I want to share those
visuals.. Twelve very beautiful pen drawings..
Those pen-drawings start each chapter in the
book. And, the author says he engaged with
a friend.. a favourite artist.. And, the artist..
you may want to go back in the video and look
at them again, or you may probably want to
buy the book and flip through the pages..
That artist placed the author’s children,
two kids, one boy, one girl, .. in each of
the chapter-images. Very tastefully done!
Take a look! We will meet you soon. Namaste!